---
layout: post
title: On Quasi-finite Morphisms (Part 2)
date: 2025-07-26
description: In this post, we continue our discussion of the application of Zariski's Main Theorem, following 'On Quasi-finite Morphisms (Part 2)'.
categories: Algebraic_Geometry
related_posts: false

scholar:
    bibliography: post_ref.bib
    source: _bibliography
    style: _bibliography/chicago-author-date-16th-edition.csl
    bibliography_template: bib_post
    sort_by: author, year, title
---

In this post, we continue our discussion of the application of Zariski's Main Theorem, following '[On Quasi-finite Morphisms (Part 1)](/blog/2025/AG-post-1/){:target="_blank"}'.

Let's recall Grothendieck's 2nd version of Zariski's Main Theorem.

>**Theorem 1 (Zariski's Main Theorem--Grothendieck's 2nd Version).**
>Let $Y$ be a quasi-compact and quasi-separated scheme.
>If $f : X \to Y$ is quasi-finite, separated, and of finite presentation, then $f$ factors as $X \xrightarrow{f'} Y' \xrightarrow{u} Y $, where $f'$ is an open immersion and $u$ is a finite morphism.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}
*Proof.* The proof requires a deep understanding of the underlying mathematics. See 8.12 of {% cite EGAIV_3 %} or [Tag 02LQ](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/02LQ){% cite stacks-project %}.$\quad\square$

The goal of this post is to show the following: if a separated morphism of finite type has a finite generic fiber, then it is 'generically finite'.

>**Definition 1.**
>A **generic point** of the topological space $X$ is a point $x \in X$ such that $X = \overline{\\{x\\}}$.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}


Recall that a topological space $X$ is **reducible** if it can be written as a union $X = X_1 \cup X_2$ of two closed proper subsets $X_1$ and $X_2$ of $X$. A topological space is **irreducible** if it is not reducible.
An **irreducible component** of a topological space is a maximal irreducible subset. If a subset is irreducible, its closure is also irreducible, so irreducible components are closed.

>**Proposition 1.**
>Let $X$ be a scheme. Any irreducible closed subset of $X$ has a unique generic point.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}
*Proof.* See Exercise 2.9(II) of {% cite Hartshorne1977 %} or [Tag 01IS](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/01IS){% cite stacks-project %}. $\quad\square$

To deal with questions about generic points, let's recall the concepts of specialization and generalization

>**Definition 2.**
>Let $X$ be a topological space. If $x,x' \in X$, then we say that $x$ is a **specialization** of $x'$ (or equivalently, $x'$ is a **generalization** of $x$) if $x \in \overline{\\{x'\\}}$, and we denote this by $x'\leadsto x$.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}

Recall that for any continuous map $f : X \to Y$ between topological spaces, for $A \subseteq X$ we have $f\left(\overline{A}\right) \subseteq \overline{f(A)}$.
Thus, continuous maps preserve the relations of specialization and generalization.

Recall that a morphism of scheme $f: X \to Y$ is **dominant** if $\overline{f(X)} = Y$.
We also define scheme-theoretically dominant morphisms.

>**Definition 3.**
>Let $f : Z \to X$ be a morphism of schemes.
>When the homomorphism $\Ocal\_X \to f_\ast\Ocal\_Z$ is injective, we say that $f$ is **scheme-theoretically dominant**.
>When $f$ is the canonical injection of a subscheme $Z \subseteq X$, we also say that $Z$ is **scheme-theoretically dense** in $X$.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}

>**Lemma 1.**
>A scheme-theoretically dominant morphism is dominant.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}

*Proof.* For any nonempty open subset $U \subseteq X$, the homomorphism $\Gamma(U,\Ocal\_X) \to \Gamma(f^{-1}(U), \Ocal\_Z)$ is injective.
Hence, $f^{-1}(U) \neq \varnothing$, implying that $U \cap f(Z) \neq \varnothing$.
This shows that $\overline{f(Z)}=X$. $\quad\square$

Now we study the definition and properties of scheme-theoretic images and closures.

>**Definition 4.**
>Let $f : X \to Y$ be a morphism of schemes. If there exists the smallest closed subscheme $Y' \subseteq Y$ such that $f$ factors through the canonical injection $j : Y' \to Y$, then $Y'$ is called the **scheme-theoretic image** of $X$ in $Y$ under $f$.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}

>**Definition 5.**
>Let $U$ be a subscheme of of a scheme $X$. 
>If there exists a smallest closed subscheme $V \subseteq X$ that contains $V$, then $V$ is called the **scheme-theoretic closure** of $U$ in $X$.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}


>**Proposition 2** ((6.10.5){% cite EGAI2%}).
>Let $f: X \to Y$ be a morphism of schemes.
>If the direct-image sheaf $f_\ast\mathcal{O}_X$ is a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_Y$-module (this is the case when $f$ is quasi-compact and quasi-separated), then the scheme-theoretic image of $Y' \subseteq Y$ of $X$ under $f$ exists.
>The scheme-theoretic image $Y'$ contains $\overline{f(X)}$ as an underlying topological space, and in the factorization
\\[ X \xrightarrow{g} Y' \xrightarrow{j} Z, \\]
>where $j$ is the canonical immersion, $g$ is schematically dominant.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}

*Proof.* Note that $f$ is quasi-compact and quasi-separated, then  $f_\ast\mathcal{O}_X$ is a quasi-coherent $\mathcal{O}_Y$-module by [Tag 01LC](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/01LC) {% cite stacks-project%}.
By the assumption, the sheaf of ideal
\\[ \Jcal  = \ker(\Ocal_Y \to f\_\ast \Ocal_X) \\]
is quasi-coherent (Prop.5.7(II){% cite Hartshorne1977 %}). 
Let $Y'$ be the closed subscheme of $Y$ determined by $\Jcal$.
It is easy to check that $Y'$ is the smallest by the construction.
Because the morphism $\Ocal\_Y / \Jcal \to f\_\ast \Ocal\_X$ is injective, the induced ring morphism $g : X \to Y'$ is schematically dominant.$\quad\square$

>**Corollary.** Let $X$ be a subscheme of a scheme $Y$, and let $j: X \to Y$ be the canonical injection.
>If $j_\ast(\Ocal\_X)$ is a quasi-coherent $\Ocal\_Y$-module (which is the case when $j$ is quasi-compact), then the scheme-theoretic closure $Y'$ of $X$ in $Y$ exists.
The scheme-theoretic closure $Y'$ contains $\overline{X}$ as an underlying topological space, and $X$ is scheme-theoretically dense in $Y'$.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}

As a last preparation step, we state some technical lemmas about generic points.

>**Lemma 2.**
>Let $f:X \to Y$ be a morphism of schemes, and let $\eta$ be the generic point of an irreducible component of $Y$.
>Let $S$ be the set of all generic points of irreducible components of $X$.
>If $f^{-1}(\eta)$ is discrete, then $f^{-1}(\eta) \subseteq S$.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}

*Proof.* Let $\eta$ be the generic point of $Y$.
Suppose that $x \in f^{-1}(\eta)$. Then there exists some generic point $\xi \in S$ such that $\xi \leadsto x$.
Thus, we get $f(\xi) \leadsto \eta$, implying that $f(\xi) = \eta$.
However, since $f^{-1}(\eta)$ is discrete, there is no non-trivial specialization in $f^{-1}(\eta)$, so we get $x = \xi$. This shows that $f^{-1}(\eta) \subseteq S$. $\quad\square$


>**Lemma 3** ([Tag 02NE](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/02NE){% cite stacks-project %}).
>Let $f:X \to Y$ be a quasi-compact morphism of schemes. Let $\eta \in Y$ be a generic point of an irreducible component of $Y$. If $\eta \notin f(X)$ then there exists an open neighborhood $V \subseteq Y$ of $\eta$ such that $f^{−1}(V)=\varnothing$.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}

Now we state the main proposition of this post.

>**Proposition 3.** Let \\(f: X \to Y\\) be separated and of finite type with \\(Y\\) irreducible and locally Noetherian.
If the fiber over the generic point \\(\eta \in Y\\) is finite, then there is an open neighborhood \\(V\\) of \\(\eta\\) in \\(Y\\) such that \\(f^{-1}(V) \to V\\) is finite.
{: .blockquote .border-start .ps-3}

*Proof.* Consider the set
\\[ U \coloneqq \\{ x \in X \mid f^{-1}(f(x)) \text{ is finite} \\} \\]
(in fact, $U$ is open by (13.1.4){% cite EGAIV_3%}).
We claim that $\eta \notin \overline{f(X \setminus U)}$.
If $\eta \in \overline{f(X \setminus U)}$, then $\overline{f(X \setminus U)} = Y$, so $f(X \setminus U)$ is dense in $Y$.
However, a quasi-compact morphism is dominant if and only if all generic points of irreducible components are in the image of $f$ ([Tag 01RL](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/01RL){% cite stacks-project %}).
Thus, we obtain $\eta \in f(X \setminus U)$, which is a contradiction.

Remove the closed set $f\overline{(X \setminus U)}$ from $Y$ and shrink the remainder to an affine neighborhood of $\eta$. After this replacement we may assume that \\(f: X \to Y\\) is separated, quasi-finite, and of finite type, where \\(Y\\) is an irreducible Noetherian affine scheme with the generic point $\eta$. This also forces $X$ to be Noetherian (Exercise 3.13(II) of {% cite Hartshorne1977 %}). Thus, $X$ has finitely many irreducible components.

Let $S = \\{\xi_1, \ldots, \xi_r, \xi_{r+1}, \ldots, \xi_{r+s}\\}$ be the set of generic points of all irreducible components of $X$, where $f^{-1}(\eta) = \\{\xi_1, \ldots, \xi_r\\}$.
Let $C \coloneqq \overline{\\{\xi_{r+1}, \ldots, \xi_{r+s}\\}}$.
Note that $\eta \notin f(C)$, since there must not be any non trivial specialization in $S$.
Hence, there is an open neighborhood of $\eta$ such that the its preimage does not intersect with $C$. 
Shrinking $Y$ to such an affine neighborhood of $\eta$, we may say that $f^{-1}(\eta) = \\{\xi_1, \ldots, \xi_r\\}$ is exactly the set of generic points of all irreducible components of $X$ (because irreducibility is preserved under restriction to non-empty open subsets, no new irreducible components appear.).

Applying Zariski's Main Theorem, we obtain the factorization $X \xrightarrow{j} Z \xrightarrow{g} Y$ of $f$, where $j$ is an open immersion and $g$ is finite.
Since $f$ and $g$ are quasi-compact and $j$ is separated, the open immersion $j$ is also quasi-compact (see  [Tag 01L7](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/01L7) and [Tag 03GI](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/03GI) of {% cite stacks-project %}).
Let $Z'$ be the scheme-theoretic image of $X$ under $j$.
Then we get the following factorization
\\[ X \xrightarrow{j} Z' \xrightarrow{g'} Y, \\]
where $j$ is a scheme-theoretically dominant open immersion, and $g'$ is finite.
Let $(g')^{-1}(\eta) = \\{\zeta_1, \ldots, \zeta_r, \zeta_{r+1}, \ldots, \zeta_{r+t}\\}$, where $\zeta_i = j(\xi_i)$ for $1 \le i \le r$.
However, since $\overline{j(X)} = Z'$, we have $\overline{\\{\zeta_1, \ldots, \zeta_r\\}} = Z'$, so $(g')^{-1}(\eta) = \\{\zeta_1, \ldots, \zeta_r\\}$ by Lemma 2.
Because $ Z'\setminus j(X)$ is closed in $Z'$, its image $g'(Z\setminus j(X) )$ is also closed in $Y$.
Note that $(g')^{-1}(\eta)$ and $f^{-1}(\eta)$ are isomorphic; therefore, $\eta$ is not in $g'(Z\setminus j(X) )$.
Take $V \coloneqq Y \setminus g'(Z\setminus j(X) )$.
Then the induced map $(g')^{-1}(V) \to V$ is still finite, and $f^{-1}(V) \to (g')^{-1}(V)$ is an isomorphism.
This ends the proof. $\quad\square$


<br>

**Acknowledgment**
I would like to thank my friend Jungwoo Park for her helpful discussions and suggestions while writing this post.

<br>

## References
{: .references}
{% bibliography --cited %}



<script src="https://giscus.app/client.js"
        data-repo="ijhlee0511/ijhlee0511.github.io"
        data-repo-id="R_kgDOJqjmWQ"
        data-category="General"
        data-category-id="DIC_kwDOJqjmWc4CX-qZ"
        data-mapping="title"
        data-strict="1"
        data-reactions-enabled="1"
        data-emit-metadata="0"
        data-input-position="bottom"
        data-theme="preferred_color_scheme"
        data-lang="en"
        crossorigin="anonymous"
        async>
</script>