---
layout: post
title: Algebraically closed complete field may not have a complete image in $\mathbb{R}$ under its absolute value
date: 2025-07-04
description: In this post, we will see that the image of $\mathbb{C}_p$, the complete algebraic closure of $\mathbb{Q}_p$, has a non-complete image in $\mathbb{R}$.
tags: Number_Theory, p-adic_Geometry
categories: Number_Theory
related_posts: false
---

In this post, we will see that the image of $\mathbb{C}_p$, the complete algebraic closure of $\mathbb{Q}_p$, has a non-complete image in $\mathbb{R}$. 
To do so, let's briefly review what the $p$-adic numbers are. 

### **1. $p$-adic Numbers** ###

Throughout this post, $p$ is a fixed positive prime number. The **$p$-adic valuation** of an integer $n$ is defined to be

$$
\nu_p(n) \coloneqq \begin{cases}
   \max\left\{ k \in \mathbb{Z}_{\ge 0} : p^k \mid n \right\} &\text{if } n \neq 0, \\
   \infty &\text{if } n = 0,
\end{cases}
$$

where $\mathbb{Z}_{\ge 0}$ denotes the set of non-negative integers.
For a rational number $r/s$ with $r \in \mathbb{Z}$ and $s \in \mathbb{Z} \setminus \\{0\\}$, we define

$$
\nu_p\left( \frac{r}{s} \right) \coloneqq \nu_p(r) - \nu_p(s).
$$

Then, the function $\nu_p : \mathbb{Q} \to \mathbb{Z} \cup \\{\infty\\}$ satisfies

1. $\nu_p(xy) = \nu_p(x) + \nu_p(y)$
2. $\nu_p(x+y) \ge \min\\{ \nu_p(x), \nu_p(y) \\}$ (equality holds when $\nu_p(x) \neq \nu_p(y)$)
3. $\nu(x) = \infty \iff x = 0$

(i.e., $\nu_p$ is a [discrete valuation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrete_valuation) on $\mathbb{Q}$). 
The **$p$-adic absolute value** on $\mathbb{Q}$ is the function $|\cdot|_p : \mathbb{Q} \to \mathbb{R}\_{\ge 0}$ defined by

$$
|x|_p \coloneqq p^{-\nu_p(x)}.
$$

It is an easy exercise to show that $|\cdot|_p$ satisfies non-negativity, positive-definiteness, multiplicativity, and the triangle inequality. 
In fact, it satisfies an inequality stronger than the triangle inequality, called **strong traingle inequality** or **ultrametric inequality**

$$
|x+y|_p \le \max \left\{ |x|_p, |y|_p\right\},
$$

where the equality holds when $\|x\|_p \neq \|y\|_p$ Thus, this absolute value induces a metric $d : \mathbb{Q} \times \mathbb{Q} \to \mathbb{R}\_{\ge 0}$ defined by $d(x,y)\coloneqq \|x-y\|_p$.
The completetion with respet to this metric to the $\mathbb{Q}$ is $\mathbb{Q}_p$, the $p$-adic numbers.

<br>

### **2. Theory of Non-Archimedean Fields.** ###

In this section, we introduce non-Arhimdean fields, which are generalizations of $p$-adic numbers, and review their important properties.

**Definition.** Let $K$ be a field. A map $\|\cdot\|: K \to \mathbb{R}\_{\ge 0}$ is called a **non-Archimedean absolute value** if for all $x,y \in K$ the following hold:

1. $\|x\| = 0 \iff x = 0$,
2. $\|xy\| = \|x\|\|y\|$,
3. $\|x+y\| \le \max\\{\|x\|, \|y\|\\}$

A fiedl with a non-Archimdean absolute value is called a **non-Archimedean field**.

**Lemma 1.** Let $K$ be a field with a non-Archimedean absolute value $\|\cdot\|$. For $x,y \in K$ with $\|x\| \neq \|y\|$, we have $\|x+y\| = \max\\{ \|x\|, \|y\| \\}$.

*Proof.* Without loss of generality, assume $\|x\| < \|y\|$.
Then we get $\|x+y\| \le \max\\{\|x\|, \|y\|\\} = \|y\|$.
On the other hand, we have

$$
|y| = |(x+y)-x| \le \max\{ |x+y|, |x| \},
$$

so $\|y\| \le \|x+y\|$ by the assumption that $\|x\| < \|y\|$. This completes the proof. $\quad\square$

Let $K$ be a field with a non-Archimedean absolute value $\|\cdot\|$.
As usual, the absolute value gives a metric $d(x,y) \coloneqq \|x-y\|$.
A non-Archimedan field $K$ is called **complete** if every Cauchy sequence converges in $k$.
For instance, the $p$-adic number $\mathbb{Q}_p$ is a typical example of complete non-Archimedean fields.
Complete non-Archimedean field has several useful algebraic properties.

**Theroem 1.** Let $K$ be a complete with respect to the given non-archimedean absolute value $\|\cdot\|$, and let $L$ be an algebraic extension of $K$.
Then there exists a unique non-Archimedean absolute value on $L$ extending the absolute value $\|\cdot\|$ from $K$.
Furthermore, $L$ is complete if $\[L : K\] < \infty$.

*Proof.* See Theorem 2 of (3.2.4) of [1].$\quad\square$

**Proposition 1.** Let $K$ be complete with respect to the given non-Archimedean absolute value $\|\cdot\|$, and let $L$ be a finite extension of $K$.
For $y \in L$, let $X^m + a_{m-1}X^{m-1} + \cdots a_0 \in K[X]$ be the minimal monic polynomial of $y$ over $K$. Then

$$
|y| = |a_m|^{1/m} = \left| N_{L/K}(y) \right|^{1/[L:K]},
$$

where $N_{L/K}: L \to K$ is the [field norm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Field_norm).

*Proof.* See Proposition 3 of (3.2.4) of [1].$\quad\square$

For a field $K$ provided with a non-archimedean absolute value $\|\cdot\|$, we denote its algebraic closure by $\overline{K}$, and we denote its completion by $\overhat{K}$.

**Proposition 2.** Let $K$ be a non-Archimedean field. If $K$ is algebraically closed, then completion $\widehat{K}$ of $K$ is algebraically closed.

*Proof.* See Proposition 3 of (3.4.1) of [1].$\quad\square$

<br>

### **3. Algebraically Closed Complete Field $\mathbb{C}_p$** ###

We denote the completion of the algebraically closure of $\mathbb{Q}_p$ by $\mathbb{C}_p$.
Then by the Proposition 2, the field $\mathbb{C}_p$ has a unique extension of $\|\cdot\|_p$, and it is still algebraically closed.
For a non-Archimedean field $K$ with an absolute value $\|\cdot\| : K \to \mathbb{R}\_{\ge 0}$, we denote the image of the function $\|\cdot\|$ by $\|K\|$, which is a subset of $\mathbb{R}$. In this section, we calculate what $\|\mathbb{C}_p\|$ exactly is.
To do so, we need an (almost trivial) claim, which is a result of ultrametric inequality.

**Claim.** Let $K$ be a field with a non-Archimedean absolute value $\|\cdot\|$. Then $\|K\| = \left\|\widehat{K} \right\|$.

*Proof.* Let $x$ be a nonzero element of $\widehat{K}$.
Then there exists a Cauchy sequence $\\{x_i\\}_i$ in $K$ such that $x_i \to x$.
We may assume that $x_i \neq 0$ for all $i$.
Since $\\{x_i\\}_i$ is Cauchy, and since $\\{|x_i|\\}$ must be bounded below, there exists some sufficiently large positive integer $N$ such that for all $m \ge n \ge N$ 

$$
|x_n - x_m| < |x_n|.
$$

Then the ultrametric triangular inequality tells us that

$$
|x_m| = |x_n + (x_m - x_n)| = \max\{ |x_n|, |x_m - x_n| \} = |x_n|.
$$

This shows that $\|x\| = \|x_N\| \in \|K\|$. $\quad\square$

By the definition, we have $\|\mathbb{Q}_p\| = p^{\mathbb{Z}} \cup \\{0\\}$ where $p^{\mathbb{Z}} \coloneqq \\{ p^n : n \in \mathbb{Z} \\}$.
Combining this fact with Propositoin 1, we obtain $\|\overline{\mathbb{Q}_p}\| = p^{\mathbb{Q}}$ where $p^{\mathbb{Q}} \coloneqq \\{ p^r : r \in \mathbb{Q} \\}$.
However, the Claim shows that $\|\mathbb{C}_p\| = p^{\mathbb{Q}} \cup \{0\}$, and it is easy to observe the it is a non-complete subset of $\mathbb{R}$.

I believe that these peculiar topological behaviors of $\mathbb{Q}_p$ and $\mathbb{C}_p$ are related to their total disconnectedness.
However, their less intuitive topological behaviors make room for rich algebraic techniques used for studying them.

<br>

## **References**
1. Bosch, S., Güntzer, U., & Remmert, R. *Non‑Archimedean Analysis: A Systematic Approach to Rigid Analytic Geometry*. Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften 261. Springer‑Verlag, 1984. ISBN 978‑3‑540‑12546‑4 <https://link.springer.com/book/9783540125464>



<script src="https://giscus.app/client.js"
        data-repo="ijhlee0511/ijhlee0511.github.io"
        data-repo-id="R_kgDOJqjmWQ"
        data-category="General"
        data-category-id="DIC_kwDOJqjmWc4CX-qZ"
        data-mapping="title"
        data-strict="1"
        data-reactions-enabled="1"
        data-emit-metadata="0"
        data-input-position="bottom"
        data-theme="preferred_color_scheme"
        data-lang="en"
        crossorigin="anonymous"
        async>
</script>