---
layout: post
title: On the Characteristic of a Ring
date: 2025-07-11
description: In this post, we will see that the usual definition of the characteristic of a ring obscures its true nature, and explain why another equivalent characterization is conceptually more useful.
categories: Algebra
related_posts: false
---

In this post, we will see that the usual definition of the characteristic of a ring obscures its true nature, and explain why another equivalent characterization is conceptually more useful.

Throughout this discussion, every ring has a multiplicative identity $1$, and every ring homomorphism $\varphi: A \to B$ must satisfy $\varphi(1_A) = 1_B$.
The ring of integers is denoted by $\mathbb{Z}$.

Several sources define the characteristic of a ring as follows.

**Definition.** The *characteristic* of a ring $A$, denoted by $\operatorname{char}(A)$, is the smallest positive integer $n$ such that $1 + 1 + \cdots + 1 = 0$ ($n$ times) in $A$; if no such integer exists the characteristic of $A$ is said to be $0$.

A merit of this definition is that it is simple and purely elementary. 
However, it is not surprising that many students who first encounter this definition feel confused by 'the characteristic $0$'.
Many students think characteristic $\infty$ is more natural than $0$ according to the above definition.
The following is the elementary proof showing that the characteristic of a field must be a prime in [1].

**Proposition 1.** The characteristic of a field $F$, $\operatorname{char}(F)$, is either $0$ or a prime $p$.
Furthermore, if $n \cdot 1_F = 0$ for $n > 0$, then $n$ is divisible by $p$.

*Proof*. For a positive integer $n$, let $n \cdot 1_F \coloneqq 1_F + \cdots + 1_F$ ($n$ times).
It is easy to see that

$$
(n \cdot 1_F)(m \cdot 1_F) = mn \cdot 1_F
$$

for positive integers $m$ and $n$.
If $n = ab$ is composite with $n \cdot 1_F = 0$, then $ab \cdot 1_F = (a \cdot 1_F)(b \cdot 1_F) = 0$, and since $F$ is a field, one of $a \cdot 1_F$ or $b \cdot 1_F$ is $0$.
Hence, the smallest such integer is necessarily a prime.
It also follows that if $n \cdot 1_F = 0$ for $n > 0$, then $n$ is divisible by $p$.$\qquad\square$

However, as one studies (commutative) algebra more deeply, one comes to realize that another equivalent characterization of the characteristic of a ring is conceptually more useful.
It is straightforward to check that the following fact holds, using the assumption that every ring homomorphism preserves the multiplicative identities.

**Fact.** For a ring $A$, there exists a unique ring homomorphism $\mathbb{Z} \to A$.

**Remark.** The fact says that $\mathbb{Z}$ is the [initial object](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Initial_and_terminal_objects) of the category of rings.

One can easily check the following definition is equivalent with the original usual definition of the characteristic of a ring.

**(New) Definition.** The *characteristic* of a ring $A$, denoted by $\operatorname{char}(A)$, is the non-negative generator of the unique ring homomorphism $\mathbb{Z} \to A$.

In this sense, the concept of 'characteristic $0$' becomes very natural.
If there is no positive integer $n$ such that $1 + 1 + \cdots + 1 = 0$ ($n$ times) in $A$, then the unique homomorphism $\mathbb{Z} \to A$ must be injective, implying that the kernel is $0$.
This definition is not only conceptually useful, but also practical in actual problem solving.
The following is a new proof of Proposition 1.

*New proof of Proposition 1.* Consider the unique ring homomorphism $\mathbb{Z} \to F$.
Since any subring of $F$ is an integral domain, the kernel of the map must be prime, so a characteristic is $0$ or a prime $p$.
If $n \cdot 1_F = 0$ for $n > 0$, then the ideal $(n)$ must be contained in $(p)$, implying that $p \mid n$.$\qquad\square$

As you can see, the proof becomes more systematic and is beautifully described in the langauge of ideal theory.
This approach can be applied to other problems.

**Problem 1.** Suppose $((A_i)\_{i \in I}, (f_{ij})\_\{i \le j \in I\})$ is an [inverse system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverse_limit) of commutative rings.
Suppose for each $i \in I$, the ring $A_i$ has a positive characteristic.
Then what can we say about the characteristic of its inverse limit?

*Solution.* Consider the unique ring homomrophism $\varphi_i : \mathbb{Z} \to A_i$.
Then the characteristic $n_i$ of $A_i$ is precisely the kernel $n_i\mathbb{Z}$ of $\varphi_i$.
Hence, we get an exact sequence of $\mathbb{Z}$-modules

$$
0 \to n_i\mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z} \to A_i.
$$

Since the inverse limit is left exact (see Proposition 10.2 of [2]), we get

$$
0 \to \varprojlim_I n_i\mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z} \to \varprojlim_I A_i. 
$$

Thus, the characteristic of $\displaystyle\lim_{\underset{I}{\longleftarrow}} A_i$ is the non-negative generator of $\displaystyle\lim_{\underset{I}{\longleftarrow}} n_i\mathbb{Z}$.
Note that $n_j\mathbb{Z} \le n_i\mathbb{Z}$ whenever $i \le j$; i.e., $n_i$ must divide $n_j$.
Thus, if $n_i$ is unbounded, then $\displaystyle\lim_{\underset{I}{\longleftarrow}} n_i\mathbb{Z} = 0$.
Otherwise, $n_i$ is eventually stablized to their least common multiplice $L$, and it is precisely the characteristic of $\displaystyle\lim_{\underset{I}{\longleftarrow}} A_i$. $\quad\square$

We can use the same strategy for the dual problem.

**Problem 2.** Suppose $((B_i)\_{i \in I}, (g_{ij})\_\{i \le j \in I\})$ is an [direct system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Direct_limit) of commutative rings.
Suppose for each $i \in I$, the ring $B_i$ has a positive characteristic.
Then what can we say about the characteristic of its direct limit?

*Solution.* Consider the unique ring homomrophism $\varphi_i : \mathbb{Z} \to B_i$.
Then the characteristic $m_i$ of $B_i$ is precisely the kernel $b_i\mathbb{Z}$ of $\varphi_i$.
Hence, we get an exact sequence of $\mathbb{Z}$-modules

$$
0 \to m_i\mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z} \to B_i.
$$

Since the direct limit is exact (see Exercise 2.19 of [2]), we get

$$
0 \to \varinjlim_I m_i\mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z} \to \varinjlim_I A_i. 
$$

Thus, the characteristic of $\displaystyle\lim_{\underset{I}{\longrightarrow}} B_i$ is the non-negative generator of $\displaystyle\lim_{\underset{I}{\longrightarrow}} m_i\mathbb{Z}$.
Note that $m_j\mathbb{Z} \ge m_i\mathbb{Z}$ whenever $i \le j$; i.e., $m_j$ must divide $m_i$.
Thus, $m_i$ must be eventually stablized to their greatest common divisor $D$, and it is precisely the characteristic of $\displaystyle\lim_{\underset{I}{\longrightarrow}} B_i$. $\quad\square$



<br>

## **References**
1. Dummit, D. S., & Foote, R. M. (2003). *Abstract Algebra* (3rd ed.). Wiley.
2. Atiyah, M. F., & MacDonald, I. G. (2018). *Introduction To Commutative Algebra*. CRC Press. [https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429493638](https://doi.org/10.1201/9780429493638)





<script src="https://giscus.app/client.js"
        data-repo="ijhlee0511/ijhlee0511.github.io"
        data-repo-id="R_kgDOJqjmWQ"
        data-category="General"
        data-category-id="DIC_kwDOJqjmWc4CX-qZ"
        data-mapping="title"
        data-strict="1"
        data-reactions-enabled="1"
        data-emit-metadata="0"
        data-input-position="bottom"
        data-theme="preferred_color_scheme"
        data-lang="en"
        crossorigin="anonymous"
        async>
</script>